INFRAESTRUCTURES DEL TRANSPORT AERI (ITA)
Final Exam - Fall semester 2021
January 21st 2022

You have Permutation CODE 0 – GROUP 00

For each question only one answer is correct: Correct: +1 test point - Incorrect: -1/3 test points - No answer: 0 points

1. Which of the following pieces of aeronautical information could
potentially appear in a NOTAM message?

(a) ”... sectorisation in Barcelona TMA from 10h to 12h is 11
Victor... ”
(b) ”... Begur (BGR) VOR unserviceable from Oct 1st to Oct
15th 2019 ...”
(c) ”... visibility more than 10km, clouds few at 3000ft, QNH
one zero seven eight, ... ”
(d) All answers are correct.

2. Which of the following pieces of aeronautical information could
potentially appear in an ATIS message?

(a) ”... runway 27L closed for maintenance ...”
(b) ”... visibility more than 10km, clouds few at 3000ft, QNH
one zero seven eight, ... ”
(c) ”... transition level is seven zero, ...”
(d) All answers are correct.

3. Which air navigation service is the responsible to disseminate
the instrument approach charts to the aircraft operators?

(a) The airspace management (ASM) service.
(b) The ﬂight inforamtion service (FIS).
(c) The aeronautical information service (AIS).
(d) The aerodrome traﬃc zone (ATZ) service.

4. Which air navigation service is the responsible to design the
instrument approach charts for the aircraft operators?

(a) The airspace management (ASM) service.
(b) The ﬂight inforamtion service (FIS).
(c) The aeronautical information service (AIS).
(d) The aerodrome traﬃc zone (ATZ) service.

5. North Atlantic oceanic airspace is...

(a) A free-route area.
(b) A free-ﬂight area.
(c) An area with only RNAV airways.
(d) A free-route area with an organised track system (called
north Atlantic tracks).

6. A pilot is reporting ”we are at ﬂight level two zero zero”. This
means:

(a) The barometric altimeter of the aircraft indicates 20 000 ft
and it is calibrated with respect to the standard pressure
at sea level (1013.25 hPa).
(b) The barometric altimeter of the aircraft indicates 20 000 ft
and it is calibrated with respect to the local QNH.
(c) The barometric altimeter of the aircraft indicates 2 000 ft
and it is calibrated with respect to the standard pressure
at sea level (1013.25 hPa).
(d) The barometric altimeter of the aircraft indicates 2 000 ft
and it is calibrated with respect to the local QNH.

7. Imagine an airport with SIDs going into all directions and STARs
coming from all directions, such as Barcelona airport. Which of
the following measures, aiming to reduce the workload of air traf-
ﬁc controllers, is the more strategic one?

(a) Publish SIDs and STARs such that they cross at points
where conﬂicting aircraft will be typically ﬂying at very
diﬀerent altitudes.
(b) Apply an ATFM measure (regulation) in case the forecast
demand exceeds the estimated capacity.
(c) Apply an ATFM measure (regulation) in case the actual
demand exceeds the existing capacity.
(d) Give direct-to instructions (radar vectoring) to aircraft, by
air traﬃc controllers, to avoid potential conﬂicts at cross-
ing points.
8. Which of the following controlled airspace zones is sized to ac-
commodate, approximately, all the aircraft ﬂying standard in-
strumental departures?
(a) The ATZ.
(b) The CTR.
(c) The TMA.
(d) The ATC.
9. What is an airspace opening scheme?
(a) It deﬁnes how the shape of the sector assigned to a speciﬁc
air traﬃc controller will change along the day.
(b) It deﬁnes the sequence of diﬀerent sector conﬁgurations
planned along the day.
(c) It deﬁnes the number of open sectors at the begining of the
day.
(d) It deﬁnes the maximum number of open sectors along the
day.
10. The free ﬂight concept allows...
(a) the pilot to freely plan a route joining two points without
the need for overﬂying speciﬁc ground facilities and submit
the route in the ﬂight plan.
(b) the procedure designer to design guided segments joining
two points without the need for overﬂying speciﬁc ground
facilities.
(c) the pilot to freely chose a route joining two points without
the need for overﬂying speciﬁc ground facilities at tactical
level assuring self-separation with other aircraft.
(d) all the answers are correct.
11. Which of the following statements is correct when talking about
free route airspace?
(a) Within free route space the pilot can freely execute the
ﬂight between any entry and exit points, but must com-
municate the intentions to the air traﬃc control.
(b) Within free route space the aircraft operator can freely
plan routes between any entry and exit points, but must
specify the chosen route in the ﬂight plan.
(c) Within free route space the air traﬃc controller can freely
move aircraft from their planned routes by giving instruc-
tions (vectors) in order to expedite the ﬂow of air traﬃc.
(d) Within free route space the air traﬃc controller is not re-
sponsible to guarantee separation between aircraft and will
only assist them in case of an emergency.
12. Which of the following ATFM initiatives is the most eﬃcient in
terms of minimising arrival delay?
(a) Ground holding.
(b) Air holding.
(c) Level capping.
(d) All initiatives are similar in terms of arrival delay.

1

13. Schedule (or IATA) slots...

(a) are slots aiming to regulate demand when the airport is
under IMC (instrument meteorological conditions).
(b) are seasonal slots aiming to prevent airlines to plan opera-
tions above a ﬁxed value of airport capacity.
(c) are the slots computed by the Network Manager, an inde-
pendent and transparent service run by IATA.
(d) all answers are correct.
14. A strike (union action) is announced by the ATC staﬀ working
in Marseille area control centre, meaning that the ATC capacity
of Marseille UIR will be signiﬁcantly reduced, leading to ATFM
regulations. If we ignore those aircraft that were already ﬂying
when the regulations are issued, these regulations will aﬀect...

(a) ... all ﬂights with a ﬂight plan crossing Marseille UIR and
arriving/departing from one of its airports below.
(b) ... all ﬂights with a ﬂight plan crossing Marseille UIR and
departing from an airport in a CFMU (Network Manager)
member state.
(c) ... all ﬂights with a ﬂight plan crossing Marseille UIR.
(d) ... any potential ﬂight arriving/departing from an airport
in a CFMU member state, even if the ﬂight plan is not
crossing Marseille UIR.
15. In the context of ATFM, what is the CTOT (calculated take-oﬀ
time)?

(a) The original take-oﬀ time of an aircraft before it is aﬀected
by an ATFM regulation.
(b) The take-oﬀ time as calculated by the airport operator.
(c) The take-oﬀ time as calculated by the air navigation service
provider.
(d) The new take-oﬀ time assigned to an aircraft aﬀected by
an ATFM regulation.
16. Pre-tactial ATFM should:

(a) Balance ﬂights next day with available ATC Capacity.
(b) Match long-term demand and needed ATC capacity.
(c) Manage current ﬂights with existing ATC capacity.
(d) Deﬁne the national airspace policy and predetermined
airspace structures.
17. Tactical ATFM should:

(a) Balance ﬂights next day with available ATC Capacity.
(b) Match long-term demand and needed ATC capacity.
(c) Manage current ﬂights with existing ATC capacity.
(d) Deﬁne the national airspace policy and predetermined
airspace structures.
18. What is a Flow Management Position (FMP)?

(a) a special position within an ATC center devoted to ATFM
issues and interfacing the center with the CFMU.
(b) the European implementation of ATFM, managed by Eu-
rocontrol.
(c) the results of running the CFMU PREDICT system the
day before of operations (D-1) allowing Eurocontrol to de-
ﬁne the ATFM measures that will be applied the D day.
(d) the CFMU system (or facility) that processes the ﬂight
plans sent by the aircraft operators.
19. Mark the wrong statement:

(a) Alert Services are provided when Air Traﬃc Control is pro-
vided.
(b) Flight Information Services are provided when Air Traﬃc
Control is provided.
(c) Alert Services are provided when Flight Information Ser-
vices are provided.
(d) Air Traﬃc Control is provided when Flight Information
Services are provided.

20. What is the international radiotelephony distress signal for avi-
ation?

(a) The word MayDay.
(b) The word MayDay repeated three times.
(c) The word Pan-Pan.
(d) The word Pan-Pan repeated three times.
21. An air traﬃc controller issues the following radiotelephony mes-
sage: Echo Charlie Uniform Papa Charlie, traﬃc at your 10
o’clock position, Cessna 172 westbound at 4 miles, 300 ft below.
Which of the following answers is correct?

(a) The message is a separation instruction to prevent a mid-
air collision.
(b) It is a distress signal message.
(c) It is a collision hazard ﬂight information message.
(d) It is a urgency signal message.
22. A VFR ﬂight is ﬂying inside an airspace of class D. The air traﬃc
controller is responsible to separate it from:

(a) all other IFR ﬂights.
(b) all other VFR ﬂights.
(c) all other VFR and IFR ﬂights.
(d) the controller has no separation responsibility with VFR
ﬂights in airspace class D.
23. Which of the following options is NOT a source of information
for the ATC?

(a) Voice position reports.
(b) Surveillance systems (PSR, SSR, ADS, etc).
(c) Visual acquisition.
(d) All the other options are in fact a source of information for
the ATC.
24. When procedural control is given to an approach procedure...

(a) the air traﬃc controller can give vectors to the aircraft to
ensure separation.
(b) the air traﬃc controller can clear only one aircraft per ap-
proach.
(c) the pilots ensure separation by their own means (visual,
ASAS, etc.).
(d) the pilots must not consider any ACAS advisory.
25. What is the role of the ATC supervisor in an ACC (area control
center)?

(a) To decide the best sectorisation to apply from a list of pre-
deﬁned sectorisations.
(b) If needed, to create new sectorisations diﬀerent from those
in the list of pre-deﬁned sectorisations.
(c) To assign delays, re-routings or level cappings to regulated
traﬃc.
(d) All the answers are correct.
26. Who is the responsible to detect and solve short term conﬂicts
within an ATC sector?

(a) The strategic controller
(b) The tactical controller.
(c) The approach controller.
(d) The ATC supervisor.
27. Which of the following sentences is correct, regarding the Letters
of Agreement (LoA) in the context of ATS?

(a) The air traﬃc controllers must have a comprehensive
knowledge of the LoA aﬀecting their sectors.
(b) The aircraft operators must have a comprehensive knowl-
edge of the LoA aﬀecting their ﬂights.
(c) The LoA are published in the AIP.
(d) All answers are correct.

2

28. What ATC dependency is typically in charge to conﬁrm that the
cruise altitude ﬁled in the ﬂight plan has been accepted?

(a) The en-route control.
(b) The ground control.
(c) The IFR clearance delivery.
(d) The tower control.
29. How the letter B is spelled, according to the ICAO radio-
telephony alphabet?

(a) Biktor.
(b) Bravo.
(c) Beta.
(d) Broquil.
30. Which is NOT correct, according to the ICAO radio-telephony
spelling alphabet?

(a) G: Golf
(b) H : Hotel
(c) X : X-trem
(d) W : Whiskey
31. Which is the radio-telephony callsign of a ﬂight labelled as
BAW142 in an ATC radar screen?

(a) Bravo Alpha Whiskey One hundred and forty-two
(b) Brussels One Four Two
(c) Speedbird One Four Two
(d) British Airways One Four Two
32. At present, which is the principal communications method in
continental Europe to link pilots with air traﬃc controllers?

(a) VHF voice communications.
(b) HF voice communications.
(c) Data-link communications.
(d) Satellite based communications.
33. Why is it diﬃcult to implement controller to pilot data link com-
munications (CPDLC) in civil aviation?

(a) CPDLC has already been implemented for several years
in Europe and USA and used extensively, at least for the
en-route phase.
(b) Because its coverage is very small and requires a high num-
ber of antennas and frequencies, leading to possible capac-
ity issues.
(c) Because it is a safe-critical system requiring very demand-
ing (and expensive) certiﬁcation processes.
(d) Because it relies on GPS, which does not meet integrity
requirements for civil aviation.
34. Who actually computes a GPS position?

(a) The receiver, using the information sent by the GPS satel-
lites.
(b) One or more GPS satellites, using the information sent by
the receiver.
(c) The GPS ground station, using the information sent by the
receiver via the GPS satellites.
(d) The receiver and at least 4 GPS satellites: the receiver
computes the 3D coordinates and the satellites compute
the diﬀerent time stamps.
35. Why in the majority of satellite based augmentation systems
(SBAS) there are three geostationary satellites?

(a) Because at least three satellites are needed to compute a
3D position.
(b) For redundancy reasons and in order to guarantee the high
levels of integrity required.
(c) For coverage reasons.

(d) For interoperability reasons.
36. Which of the following statements is true?

(a) GPS integrity is related with the average time (latency)
the receiver needs to compute the position.
(b) GPS integrity is related with the average time the GPS
ground-control segment needs to detect a satellite is not
working properly.
(c) GPS integrity is related with the probability that the po-
sitioning error exceeded a certain threshold.
(d) GPS integrity is related with the probability to have the
system unavailable.
37. Which transponder mode transmits only the transponder code
and the barometric altitude of the aircraft?

(a) Mode A.
(b) Mode B.
(c) Mode C.
(d) Mode S.
38. Which of the following statements is true?

(a) ADS-B positioning is based on secondary radar interroga-
tions.
(b) ADS-B has the advantage to be signiﬁcantly cheaper than
secondary radar technology.
(c) ADS-B positioning is independent from the navigation sys-
tem of the aircraft.
(d) ADS-B has the advantage that an aircraft is always de-
tected, even if the crew is not willing to ”cooperate”.
39. Regarding the Instrumental Approach Chart (IAC) Girona ILS
Z RWY20, annexed to this exam, the initial approach segment
for the procedure starting at GIR IAF is:

(a) a dead-reckoning segment that depends on the aircraft
speed.
(b) a racetrack procedure.
(c) an ILS path.
(d) a reversal procedure.
40. Regarding the Instrumental Approach Chart (IAC) Girona ILS
Z RWY20, annexed to this exam:

(a) It is a straight-in and a precision approach.
(b) It is a straight-in and a non precision approach.
(c) It is a circling and a precision approach.
(d) It is a circling and a non precision approach.
41. Regarding the Instrumental Approach Chart (IAC) Girona ILS
Z RWY20, annexed to this exam, the radionavigation aid la-
beled as IGN is a:

(a) Localizer.
(b) VOR/DME.
(c) DME.
(d) Locator.
42. Regarding the Instrumental Approach Chart (IAC) Menorca
VOR, annexed to this exam, the aircraft operator will publish
for their crew...

(a) a decision altitude.
(b) a minimum descent altitude.
(c) an obstacle clearance altitude.
(d) a minimum decision altitude.
43. Regarding the Instrumental Approach Chart (IAC) Menorca
VOR, annexed to this exam, the initial approach segment for
the procedure starting at MHN IAF is...

(a) a holding procedure.
(b) a racetrack procedure.
(c) a VOR radial.
(d) a dead-reckoning radial.

3

44. Regarding the Instrumental Approach Chart (IAC) Menorca
VOR, annexed to this exam, the intermediate segment for the
procedure starting at DONAV is:

(a) a dead-reckoning leg.
(b) an arc DME.
(c) a VOR radial.
(d) a NDB course.
45. The Visual Flight Rules (VFR) airﬁeld traﬃc pattern leg by
which an aircraft ﬂies perpendicular to the runway and starts
descending is called:

(a) upwind.
(b) crosswind.
(c) downwind.
(d) base.
46. Imagine a twin engine aircraft departing in IMC from a con-
trolled airport. Few seconds after take-oﬀ, it hits birds, causing
a ﬁre in one of the engines and loosing all of its power. In this
situation, the communicate function of the aircraft crew would
be:

(a) to check if there is a contingency departure published for
that airport and execute it.
(b) to safely control the aircraft trajectory with the loss of
power and to manage to extinguish the ﬁre and shut down
the engine.
(c) to send a distress message to the air traﬃc control.
(d) to revert to manual control and visual ﬂight to safely land
as soon as possible.
47. An aircraft operator (RNAV equipped) is deﬁning the best route
to go from Girona airport to Eivissa airport (named Ibiza in the
chart). According to the IFR navigation charts given in annex
to this exam, which of the following IFR routes, as it would be
written into an ATS ﬂight plan, is correct?

(a) GIR – N727 – SALON – A27 – POS – A6 – SURIB – G30
– IZA
(b) MAMUK – B31 – BCN – Z174 – CORDA
(c) MAMUK – H110 – REBUL – A29 – RES – A293 – GODOX
(d) SLL – B31 – TOLSO
48. An aircraft operator (RNAV equipped) is deﬁning the best route
to go from Eivissa airport (named Ibiza in the chart) to Girona
airport. According to the IFR navigation charts given in annex
to this exam, which of the following IFR routes, as it would be
written into an ATS ﬂight plan, is correct?

(a) IZA – G30 – SURIB – A6 – POS – A27 – SALON – N727
– GIR
(b) CORDA – Z174 – BCN – B31 – MAMUK
(c) GODOX – A293 – RES – A29 – REUBUL – H110 –
MAMUK
(d) TOLSO – B31 – SLL
49. An aircraft operator (RNAV equipped) is deﬁning the best route
to go from Girona airport to Menorca airport. According to the
IFR navigation charts given in annex to this exam, which of the
following IFR routes, as it would be written into an ATS ﬂight
plan, is correct?

(a) GIR – N727 – SARGO – A67 – MHN
(b) GIR – H110 – BGR – A67 – MHN
(c) BGR – A67 – SARGO
(d) GIR – H110 – BGR – A67 – SARGO – A67 – MHN
50. Which type of ﬁx is NEVIK, which appears in the SID chart for
RWY01 in Menorca airport (see IFR navigation charts given in
annex to this exam)?

(a) an intersection.
(b) a radionavigation facility.

(c) a RNAV waypoint.
(d) none of the other answers is correct.
51. Which type of ﬁx is ADX, which appears in the SID chart for
RWY01 in Menorca airport (see IFR navigation charts given in
annex to this exam)?

(a) an intersection.
(b) a radionavigation facility.
(c) a RNAV waypoint.
(d) none of the other answers is correct.
52. Regarding the SID MAMUK1H for RWY20 at Girona airport
(see IFR navigation charts given in annex to this exam), which
of the following statements is correct?

(a) All aircraft shall be at FL75 or above when overﬂying MA-
MUK.
(b) All aircraft shall be at FL75 or below when overﬂying MA-
MUK.
(c) All aircraft shall be at strictly below FL75 when overﬂying
MAMUK.
(d) All aircraft shall be at FL75 when overﬂying MAMUK.
53. Regarding the legs that compose the GEANT1H SID for RWY20
at Girona airport (see IFR navigation charts given in annex to
this exam), which of the following options is correct?

(a) The SID is formed by the succession of three consecutive
VOR radials.
(b) The SID is formed by one VOR radial, followed by a dead-
reckoning leg, followed by another VOR radial.
(c) The SID is formed by a dead-reckoning leg, followed by a
DME arc, followed by two VOR radials.
(d) The SID is formed by a VOR radial, followed by a DME
arc, followed by two VOR radials.
54. Regarding the legs that compose the BGR4H SID for RWY20 at
Girona airport (see IFR navigation charts given in annex to this
exam), which of the following options is correct?

(a) The SID is formed by the succession of three consecutive
VOR radials.
(b) The SID is formed by one VOR radial, followed by a dead-
reckoning leg, followed by another VOR radial.
(c) The SID is formed by a dead-reckoning leg, followed by a
DME arc, followed by a VOR radial.
(d) The SID is formed by a VOR radial, followed by a DME
arc, followed by a VOR radial.
55. Imagine an aircraft executing the KABRE1F arrival procedure
for runway 19R at Menorca airport (see IFR navigation charts
given in annex to this exam) when the ATC instructs the pilot
to hold at the IAF of this approach. In this case, the aircraft will
enter the hold with...

(a) a racetrack entry procedure.
(b) a direct entry procedure.
(c) an oﬀset entry procedure.
(d) a parallel entry procedure.
56. Imagine an aircraft executing the KABRE1F arrival procedure
for runway 19R at Menorca airport (see IFR navigation charts
given in annex to this exam). The aircraft is still following Radial
233 of MHN VOR when the ATC instructs the pilot to proceed
direct to MN IAF and hold (please note there is a hold for MN
and a diﬀerent hold fr MHN depicted in the chart). In this case,
the aircraft will enter the hold with...

(a) a racetrack entry procedure.
(b) a direct entry procedure.
(c) an oﬀset entry procedure.
(d) a parallel entry procedure.
57. Imagine an aircraft executing the MAMUK1F arrival procedure
(see IFR navigation charts given in annex to this exam). What
deﬁnes the IAF for this procedure?

4

(a) an intersection.
(b) a VOR.
(c) a DME.
(d) an NDB.
58. Which of the following aircraft instruments are mainly used to
perform the aviate function in IMC conditions?

(a) the VOR, the ADF (NDB receiver) and the DME.
(b) the artiﬁcial horizon and the airspeed indicator.
(c) the aviate function is always executed visually and no in-
struments are required.
(d) all engine related instruments.
59. When does a STAR begins?

(a) At a given radionavigation ﬁx.
(b) At the top of descent.
(c) At a given visual landmark.
(d) Depending on the airport and TMA characteristics, any of
the previous answers could be possible.
60. In a conventional IFR holding, which leg is typically a dead reck-
oning leg?

(a) The outbound leg.
(b) The inbound leg.
(c) The inbound and the outbound legs.
(d) Only the two turns are executed in dead reckoning.
61. When executing an airﬁeld traﬃc pattern, the aircraft has always
instrumental guidance, at least, in...

(a) the downwind leg
(b) the ﬁnal leg
(c) the downwind, base and ﬁnal legs
(d) None of the other answers is correct.
62. A circling to approach with prescribed tracks...

(a) consists of a sequence of visual tracks that guide the pilot
when ﬂying the circling procedure.
(b) consists of a sequence of instrumental tracks that guide the
pilot when ﬂying the circling procedure.
(c) consists of a sequence of visual tracks to be avoided by the
pilot when ﬂying the circling procedure.
(d) consists of a sequence of instrumental tracks to be avoided
by the pilot when ﬂying the circling procedure.
63. Which of the following statements is correct?

(a) A VOR approach is always a NPA (non precision approach)
procedure (*).
(b) A NPA (non precision approach) is always a VOR proce-
dure (*).
(c) The answers marked with (*) are correct.
(d) None of the other answers is correct.
64. An approach procedure using a Locator as principal guidance
system in the ﬁnal approach segment is...

(a) a precision approach.
(b) a non-precision approach.
(c) an APV approach.
(d) a Locator cannot be used as principal guidance system in
the ﬁnal approach segment.
65. An approach procedure only using a Localiser as principal guid-
ance system in the ﬁnal approach segment is...

(a) a precision approach.
(b) a non-precision approach.
(c) an APV approach.

(d) a Localiser cannot be used as principal guidance system in
the ﬁnal approach segment.
66. The MDA...

(a) is the minimum altitude to start an IFR approach proce-
dure.
(b) is used in VFR operations, while the DA is used in IFR
operations.
(c) is the lowest altitude to which descent is authorized on the
ﬁnal approach segment if no suﬃcient visual references are
met.
(d) None of the other answers are correct.
67. The OCA...

(a) is the minimum descent altitude for VFR ﬂights.
(b) is the lowest altitude the pilot should have a clear view of
the runway or airport, otherwise a missed approach proce-
dure must be initiated.
(c) is the altitude from which a procedure becomes a Non Pre-
cision Approach.
(d) None of the other answers are correct.
68. Which of the following statements is correct?

(a) The aircraft operator must compute and publish the MDA
in the charts used by their pilots.
(b) The appropriate ANS national administration may com-
pute the MDA and publish it in the AIP charts.
(c) The appropriate ANS national administration must com-
pute a lower bound for the MDA and publish it in the AIP
charts.
(d) All statements are correct.
69. In a VOR approach procedure, the decision to land or to execute
a missed approach must be taken, at the latest...

(a) when reaching the MDA.
(b) when reaching the DA.
(c) when reaching the OCA.
(d) when reaching the MAPt.
70. Who is responsible to design and publish the missed approach
segment in an approach chart (assuming nominal operations)?

(a) The aircraft operator.
(b) The aircraft manufacturer.
(c) The airport operator.
(d) The appropriate ANS national administration.
71. In which of the following procedures the ﬁnal approach segment
will start at a FIX and not at a POINT?

(a) In an ILS approach.
(b) In a VOR approach (*).
(c) In a Localizer approach (*).
(d) The answers labelled with (*) are correct.
72. A racetrack procedure...

(a) is a type of holding pattern.
(b) could be, for instance, a 45/180 procedure turn.
(c) is when an aircraft uses an active runway to taxi in the op-
posite direction from which it will take oﬀ or has landed.
(d) None of the other answers is correct.
73. If the misalignment of the ﬁnal approach track with respect to
the runway centre line exceeds 90 degrees...

(a) only a circling to approach is possible.
(b) only a precision approach is possible
(c) a straight-in approach is possible if the ﬁnal descent gradi-
ent does not exceed some speciﬁc limits.
(d) an instrumental approach cannot be designed in such cir-
cumstances.
74. The minimum decision height for an ILS CAT-I approach is:

5

(a) 300ft.
(b) 200ft.
(c) 100ft.
(d) 0ft.
75. In the paper 1 of WP3 with title ”Enhanced Demand and Ca-
pacity Balancing based on Alternative Trajectory Options and
Traﬃc Volume Hotspot Detection”, the advantages of the pro-
posed enhanced demand and capacity balancing in comparison
with the RBS method are:

(a) It solves the demand and capacity imbalance considering
the full network.
(b) The total amount of delay is signiﬁcantly reduced.
(c) It considers the AUs preferences.
(d) All options are correct.
76. In relation with paper 1 of WP3 with title ”European route choice
determinants”, which of the following elements is not considered
when deﬁning the route charges:

(a) Distance.
(b) Speed.
(c) Weight.
(d) Unit rate.
77. In relation with paper 4 of WP3 with title ”Identifying the
Sources of Flight Ineﬃciency from Historical Aircraft Trajecto-
ries”, why the current distance-based PIs are not good enough?:

(a) Because they are not considering the vertical proﬁle.
(b) Because they are not considering the free route network.
(c) Because they do not consider the horizontal track of the
trajectory.
(d) All options are correct
78. Regarding the ﬁgure 1a, the Delta aircraft is:

(a) at FL250 and descending, cleared to FL160 and with a
planned exit level at FL190.
(b) at FL250 and descending, cleared to FL190 and with a
planned exit level at FL160.
(c) at FL190 and descending, cleared to FL250 and with a
planned exit level at FL160.
(d) at FL190 and descending, cleared to FL160 and with a
planned exit level at FL250.
79. Regarding the ﬁgure 1a, the heading of the Delta aircraft is:

(a) approximately 0 o
(b) approximately 45 o
(c) approximately 90 o
(d) approximately 130 o
80. Consider ﬁgure 1b, where the aircraft label is displayed in blue
colour and all the airspace shown in the picture belongs to our
sector. If we assume we are controlling an en-route sector of
Barcelona UIR, then we can say that...

(a) AEA979D is not yet in our sector but will enter in few
minutes from below.
(b) AEA979D is not yet in our sector but will enter in few
minutes from above.
(c) AEA979D is in our sector and climbing to FL260.
(d) AEA979D is in our sector and climbing to FL320.
81. Consider ﬁgure 1b, where the aircraft label is displayed in blue
colour and all the airspace shown in the picture belongs to our
sector. If we assume we are controlling an en-route sector of
Barcelona UIR. What does FL260 in the aircraft label means?

(a) The planned entry ﬂight level to our sector.
(b) The exit ﬂight level of our sector.
(c) The last cleared ﬂight level.

(d) The desired cruise altitude of the aircraft.
82. Figure 1c shows:

(a) A GPWS alert.
(b) A STCA alert.
(c) A TCAS TA alert.
(d) A TCAS RA alert.
83. In order to solve the conﬂict shown in Figure 1c in the most ef-
ﬁcient way, the ATC could instruct the AFR161 to change the
altitude to:

(a) FL270
(b) FL369
(c) FL365
(d) FL360
84. Figure 1d shows a radar screenshot taken at the North border of
Barcelona UIR. EZY1713 is scheduled to land in Valencia, while
EZY9JA is just transiting in the UIR. Which of the following
statements is correct?

(a) There is no potential conﬂict between the two aircraft if
the ATC clears EZY1713 immediately to FL220.
(b) There is no potential conﬂict between the two aircraft if
the ATC clears EZY9JA immediately to FL330.
(c) There is a potential conﬂict between the two aircraft that
can be solved by changing appropriately the exit ﬂight level
of EZY1713.
(d) There is a potential conﬂict between the two aircraft that
can be solved by deviating laterally one of the two aircraft
and instructing the EZY1713 to descend when ready.
85. Regarding the ﬁgure 1d, what does the tip of the black line ap-
pearing next to each aircraft symbol indicate?

(a) The estimated position of the aircraft, after a given period
of time, based on the current aircraft heading and speed.
(b) The estimated position of the aircraft, after a given period
of time, based on the ﬁled ﬂight plan.
(c) The minimum separation distance between two aircraft.
(d) The black line gives a visual information to the controller
regarding the vertical speed of the aircraft.
86. What was the sector PON in the ITA ATC laboratory simula-
tions?

(a) an approach sector of Barcelona TMA.
(b) a departures sector of Barcelona TMA.
(c) an en-route sector of Barcelona FIR/UIR.
(d) a sector of Barcelona CTR, for the West plan conﬁguration.
87. Regarding the ITA ATC laboratory simulations, in how many
sectors was the Barcelona UIR divided?

(a) Two: CAT-W and CAT-E
(b) Two: BCN and GRN
(c) Four: CAT-N, CAT-S, CAT-W and CAT-E
(d) Three: PON, MED and LLE
88. In the ITA ATC laboratory simulations, CAT-W was a sector in
Barcelona TMA. Which of the following initial contact messages
issued by a pilot entering into the sector is correct?

(a) Barcelona approach, Vueling one two three, good morning.
(b) Barcelona TMA, Vueling one two three, good morning.
(c) Catalunya West, Vueling one two three, good morning.
(d) CAT Whiskey, Vueling one two three, good morning.
89. In the San Francisco airport (SFO), two parallel approaches are
executed if visibility meteorological conditions (VMC) are met.
Otherwise, only one instrumental approach is executed in one of
the runways. Which of the following statements is correct?

(a) In VMC, runway capacity in SFO is increased at the ex-
pense of reducing safety.

6

(b) In VMC, ﬂight eﬃciency of SFO arrivals is increased at the
expense of reducing safety.
(c) In VMC, ﬂight eﬃciency of SFO arrivals is increased at the
expense of reducing capacity.
(d) None of the other answers is correct.
90. Continuous descent operations are not possible in very congested
airports. This is a illustrative example of a trade-oﬀ, or interde-
pendency, between:

(a) ﬂight eﬃciency and environmental impact.
(b) ﬂight eﬃciency and safety.
(c) capacity and safety.
(d) capacity and ﬂight eﬃciency.
91. What separation procedure is mainly used in oceanic airspace?

(a) Radar separation.
(b) Self separation.
(c) Procedural separation.
(d) TCAS-only separation.
92. Which of the following statements is correct?

(a) Tromboning procedures in terminal airspace are mainly de-
signed to improve the eﬃciency of the ﬂights, if compared
with continuous descent operations.
(b) Tromboning procedures in terminal airspace are mainly de-
signed to improve airspace and airport capacity, if com-
pared with holding patterns.
(c) Tromboning procedures in terminal airspace are one of the
collision avoidance layers.
(d) All other answers are correct.
93. When talking about the Short Term Conﬂict Alert (STCA) sys-
tem, which of the following statements is wrong?

(a) The STCA function alerts the controller to potential air-
craft to aircraft collisions prior to loss of separation.
(b) The STCA does not take into account the possible clear-
ances given to the aircraft.
(c) Future aircraft positions are estimations based on the ve-
locity vectors of the aircraft.
(d) The STCA communicates with the on-board TCAS and
when a TCAS alarm triggers, also does the STCA alarm
and vice-versa.

94. When the intruding aircraft is equipped with a transponder with-
out altitude reporting capability, the TCAS (Traﬃc Collision
Avoidance System) issues a:

(a) traﬃc advisory and vertical resolution advisory.
(b) traﬃc advisory only.
(c) traﬃc advisory and horizontal resolution advisory.
(d) traﬃc advisory, vertical and horizontal resolution advisory.

95. If a potential collision conﬂict is detected by an ACAS II/TCAS
system, what type of advisory is triggered ﬁrst?

(a) A Resolution Advisory (RA) that includes a range of ver-
tical speed at which the aircraft should be ﬂown to avoid
the potential collision.
(b) A Resolution Advisory (RA) that includes a range of in-
dicated airspeeds at which the aircraft should be ﬂown to
avoid the potential collision.
(c) A Traﬃc Advisory (TA) that includes a range of vertical
speeds at which the aircraft should be ﬂown to avoid the
potential collision.
(d) A Traﬃc Advisory (TA), which is intended to assist the
aircraft crew in the visual acquisition of the conﬂicting air-
craft and/or raise their situational awareness.
